The invention relates to a book-keeping machine intended for the calculation and recording of new balances resulting from old balances of an account and the amounts received and paid out. A balance mechanism, which in known manner comprises two kinds of counting wheels, viz. adding and subtracting wheels, serves for the calculation of the new balances.

The invention resides in the fact that in all booking operations the coupling of the adding or subtracting wheels with the differential wheels is effected immediately by the depression of the motor key. The selection of the adding or subtracting side of the balance mechanism in the machine operations, serving to record the amounts set up on the keyboard (old balance, amounts paid in or out) takes place simultaneously with the depression of a key by which a control totalizer is thrown into operation. The keys "paid in" and "paid out" of these control totalizers serve further to unlock keys that serve to throw secondary totalizers for debit and credit accounts into cooperation.

In taking the total from the balance mechanism (new balance) the coupling of the adding or subtracting side selected in the preceding machine operation by the balance mechanism itself is prepared by setting a "balance lever" and is carried out by depression of the motor key, that is without any special maniplations, the respective one of the two control totalizers which serves to accumulate new negative or positive amounts being likewise selected automatically and coupled and the respective printing character being selected and printed.

On taking totals only one totalizer may be coupled. In taking the total from one of the totalizers the balance mechanism normally coupled therewith by depressing the motor key is uncoupled. According to the invention this is effected by setting the "kind-of-operation" lever.

The amount accumulated in the balance mechanism may be positive or negative. the positive amounts being accumulated in the adding wheels, while the negative amounts are accumulated in the subtracting wheels. Both these sets of wheels thus may. work alternatively as main counting wheels or as companion complementary wheels. As the two wheels of each order are in a set position which is complementary to 9, and every complementary amount in the companion counting wheels is always by one unit smaller than the decadal complementary amount required for the execution of the subtracting operation by addition of the complementary amounts, in the passage of the total accumulated in the balance mechanism from positive into negative condition or inversely, that, is upon the counting wheels changing, the unit failing in the companion counting wheels is added by a correcting mechanism which upon the number 99999 being exceeded causes in the companion counting wheels a transfer of the 1-correction to the units order, while upon the number 99999 being exceeded in the main counting wheels, that is upon the capacity of the balance mechanism being exceeded, the transfer of the 1-correction to the tens transfer pinion of the units order is prevented. A mechanism which operates the same in principle, but which is of different form, is described in the United States Patent to Bornkessel et al., No. 1,896,936, of February 7, 1933. According to the invention, the actuation of the tens transfer pinion of the units order, which actuation is caused only upon the positive or negative condition of the counting wheels of the balance mechanism changing and serving to transfer the additional unit, Is effected by an additional revolution of a step shaft, the first revolution of which serves to cause the normal tens transfers.